ls - To list files and directories in the current working directory.
options in ls:-
ls -l : Display files with their information in long format.
ls -h : Display file sizes in human readable format.
ls -d : List directories themselves, not their contents.
ls -a : Shows all files including hidden files.
ls -F : Shows file type by adding symbols.
ls -s : Display the size of each file in blocks.
ls -S : List files sorted according to their size.

cd - To change the current working directory.
options in cd:-
cd - : Switch to the previous working directory.
cd .. : Move to the parent directory.
cd ~ : Move to the home directory.

mkdir - To create directories.
options in mkdir:-
mkdir -p : Makes parent directories if they are not created.
mkdir -m : Creates directory with specified permissions.

touch - To create new empty files or update file timestamps.
options in touch:-
touch -a : Change only access time.
touch -m : Change only modification time.
touch -t : Use specific time instead of current time.

pwd - To print the current working directory.
options in pwd:-
pwd -L : Display the logical current working directory.
pwd -P : Display the physical current working directory.

rmdir - To remove empty directories.
options in rmdir:-
rmdir -p : Deletes parent directories also if they are empty.
rmdir --ignore-fail-on-non-empty : Ignore failures caused by non-empty directories.

rm - To remove files and directories.
options in rm:-
rm -f : Forcefully delete files without prompting.
rm -r : Recursively deletes files and directories.
rm -i : Ask for confirmation before deleting.
rm -d : Delete empty directories.

cat - To display the contents of a file.
options in cat:-
cat -n : Prints numbers of lines.
cat -b : Numbers only non-empty lines.
cat -A : Shows non-printing characters.
cat -E : Shows the end of each line.

echo - To print text or variables to the terminal.
options in echo:-
echo -n : Do not print a newline at the end.
echo -e : Enable interpretation of escape characters.
echo -E : Disable interpretation of escape characters.

nano - A simple terminal-based text editor.
options in nano:-
nano -l : Display line numbers.
nano -m : Enable mouse support.
nano -B : Create a backup file when saving.

apt - To install, remove, update, and upgrade packages.
options in apt:-
apt update : Update the package information.
apt upgrade : Upgrade installed packages.
apt install : Install a package.
apt remove : Remove a package.
apt search : Search for a package.
apt show : Display package information.

find - To search for files and directories.
options in find:-
find -iname : Find files/folders by name without being case sensitive.
find -name : Find files/folders by name with case sensitivity.
find -empty : Find empty files and directories.
find -group : Find files belonging to a specific group.
find -readable : Find files that are readable.
find -size : Find files according to their size.
find -type : Find specific types such as files or directories.
find -user : Find files belonging to a specific user.
find -perm : Find files according to their permissions.

gcc - To compile C programs.
options in gcc:-
gcc -o : Specify the name of the output file.
gcc -c : Compile source code without linking.
gcc -Wall : Enable common warning messages.
gcc -g : Add debugging information.

cp - To copy files and directories from one location to another.
options in cp:-
cp -r : Copy directories and their contents recursively.
cp -i : Ask for confirmation before overwriting.
cp -f : Forcefully copy files.
cp -v : Display what is being copied.

mv - To move or rename files and directories.
options in mv:-
mv -i : Ask for confirmation before overwriting.
mv -f : Forcefully move files.
mv -v : Display what is being moved.

tac - To display the contents of a file in reverse order.
options in tac:-
tac -b : Attach the separator before instead of after.
tac -s : Use a specific string as the separator.
tac -r : Treat the separator as a regular expression.

grep - To search for specific or matching text in files.
options in grep:-
grep -i : Ignore case while searching.
grep -n : Display line numbers of matching lines.
grep -v : Display lines that do not match.
grep -r : Search recursively in directories.
grep -w : Match whole words only.
grep -c : Count matching lines.

wc - To count lines, words, characters, and bytes in a file.
options in wc:-
wc -l : Count the number of lines.
wc -w : Count the number of words.
wc -c : Count the number of bytes.
wc -m : Count the number of characters.

man - To view the manual/help page of a command.
options in man:-
man -f : Display a short description of a command.
man -k : Search manual pages by keyword.
man -a : Display all available manual pages.

cal & ncal - To display a calendar.
options in cal/ncal:-
cal -3 : Display previous, current, and next month.
cal -y : Display the calendar for the entire year.
cal -m : Display the calendar with Monday as the first day.

date - To display the current date and time.
options in date:-
date -u : Display date and time in UTC.
date -d : Display a date according to the given date string.
date +%D : Display date in MM/DD/YY format.
date +%T : Display time in HH:MM:SS format.

sudo - To perform commands with superuser/administrator privileges.
options in sudo:-
sudo -u : Run command as a specified user.
sudo -i : Start an interactive login shell as root.
sudo -l : List the commands the current user can run with sudo.

clear - To clear the terminal screen.
options in clear:-
clear -x : Clear the terminal screen without clearing the scrollback buffer.

who - To display users currently logged into the system.
options in who:-
who -H : Display column headings.
who -q : Display logged-in users and their number.
who -b : Display the last system boot time.

whoami - To display the username of the current user.
options in whoami:-
whoami --help : Display help information.
whoami --version : Display version information.

chmod - To change file permissions.
options in chmod:-
chmod -R : Change permissions recursively.
chmod -v : Display a diagnostic for every file processed.
chmod -c : Report only when a change is made.

chown - To change ownership of a file or directory.
options in chown:-
chown -R : Change ownership recursively.
chown -v : Display a diagnostic for every file processed.
chown -c : Report only when a change is made.

head - To display the beginning of a text file.
options in head:-
head -n : Display the specified number of lines from the beginning.
head -c : Display the specified number of bytes.
head -q : Do not display file headers.

tail - To display the end of a text file.
options in tail:-
tail -n : Display the specified number of lines from the end.
tail -c : Display the specified number of bytes.
tail -f : Continuously display new data added to the file.
tail -q : Do not display file headers.

du - To display the disk space used by files and directories.
options in du:-
du -h : Display disk usage in human readable format.
du -s : Display only the total disk usage.
du -a : Display disk usage of all files and directories.

df - To display available and used disk space of file systems.
options in df:-
df -h : Display disk space in human readable format.
df -T : Display file system type.

free - To display used and available memory.
options in free:-
free -h : Display memory in human readable format.
free -m : Display memory in megabytes.

ps - To display information about running processes.
options in ps:-
ps -e : Display all running processes.
ps -f : Display processes in full format.
ps -u : Display processes of a specific user.

top - To display real-time information about running processes.
options in top:-
top -b : Run top in batch mode.
top -n : Specify the number of updates.
top -u : Display processes of a specific user.

kill - To terminate a running process.
options in kill:-
kill -l : List available signals.
kill -9 : Forcefully terminate a process.
kill -15 : Terminate a process gracefully.

uname - To display system information.
options in uname:-
uname -a : Display all system information.
uname -r : Display the kernel release.
uname -m : Display the machine hardware name.

hostname - To display the system hostname.
options in hostname:-
hostname -I : Display the IP addresses of the system.
hostname -s : Display the short hostname.

ip - To display and manage network information.
options in ip:-
ip addr : Display IP addresses and network interfaces.
ip link : Display network interfaces.
ip route : Display the routing table.

ping - To test network connectivity between systems.
options in ping:-
ping -c : Send a specified number of packets.
ping -i : Set the interval between packets.
ping -4 : Use IPv4.

passwd - To change a user's password.
options in passwd:-
passwd -l : Lock a user's password.
passwd -u : Unlock a user's password.
passwd -d : Delete a user's password.

id - To display user and group information.
options in id:-
id -u : Display the user ID.
id -g : Display the group ID.
id -G : Display all group IDs.

groups - To display the groups a user belongs to.
options in groups:-
groups username : Display the groups of a specific user.

systemctl - To manage systemd services.
options in systemctl:-
systemctl start : Start a service.
systemctl stop : Stop a service.
systemctl restart : Restart a service.
systemctl status : Display the status of a service.
systemctl enable : Enable a service at boot.
systemctl disable : Disable a service at boot.

less - To view the contents of a file one screen at a time.
options in less:-
less -N : Display line numbers.
less -S : Do not wrap long lines.

more - To display file contents one screen at a time.
options in more:-
more -d : Display help information.
more -s : Squeeze multiple blank lines into one.

sort - To sort lines of text.
options in sort:-
sort -r : Sort in reverse order.
sort -n : Sort numbers numerically.
sort -u : Remove duplicate lines.
sort -f : Ignore case while sorting.

file - To determine and display the type of a file.
options in file:-
file -b : Display file type without displaying the filename.
file -i : Display the MIME type of the file.

history - To display previously executed commands.
options in history:-
history -c : Clear the command history.
history -d : Delete a specific history entry.
history -w : Save the current history to the history file.
history -w : Save the current history to the history file.

ss - To display network socket and connection information.
options in ss:-
ss -t : Display TCP connections.
ss -u : Display UDP connections.
ss -l : Display listening sockets.
ss -n : Display addresses and port numbers without resolving names.

nslookup - To query DNS and obtain domain or IP address information.
options in nslookup:-
nslookup domain : Find the IP address of a domain.
nslookup IP : Find the domain name associated with an IP address.
nslookup -type= : Query a specific DNS record type.

dig - To perform DNS queries and display DNS information.
options in dig:-
dig domain : Display DNS information of a domain.
dig +short : Display a short DNS answer.
dig -x : Perform a reverse DNS lookup.

traceroute - To display the path taken by packets to reach a destination.
options in traceroute:-
traceroute -4 : Use IPv4.
traceroute -6 : Use IPv6.
traceroute -n : Do not resolve IP addresses to hostnames.

ifconfig - To display or configure network interfaces.
options in ifconfig:-
ifconfig -a : Display all network interfaces.
ifconfig interface : Display information about a specific interface.
ifconfig interface up : Enable a network interface.
ifconfig interface down : Disable a network interface.

route - To display or modify the IP routing table.
options in route:-
route -n : Display the routing table without resolving hostnames.
route -v : Display detailed routing information.

netstat - To display network connections, routing tables, and network statistics.
options in netstat:-
netstat -a : Display all connections and listening ports.
netstat -t : Display TCP connections.
netstat -u : Display UDP connections.
netstat -r : Display the routing table.
netstat -i : Display network interface statistics.

cron - To schedule and automate tasks to run at specific times or intervals.

crontab - To create, view, edit, and remove scheduled cron jobs.
options in crontab:-
crontab -e : Edit the current user's cron jobs.
crontab -l : List the current user's cron jobs.
crontab -r : Remove all cron jobs of the current user.
crontab -u : Specify a particular user.

cron job format:-
* * * * * command
| | | | |
| | | | +--- Day of week (0-7)
| | | +----- Month (1-12)
| | +------- Day of month (1-31)
| +--------- Hour (0-23)
+----------- Minute (0-59)

examples:-
* * * * * command : Run the command every minute.
0 * * * * command : Run the command every hour.
0 9 * * * command : Run the command every day at 9:00 AM.
0 0 * * 0 command : Run the command every Sunday at midnight.

systemctl - To manage the cron service.
commands in systemctl:-
systemctl status cron : Display the status of the cron service.
systemctl start cron : Start the cron service.
systemctl stop cron : Stop the cron service.
systemctl restart cron : Restart the cron service.
systemctl enable cron : Enable the cron service at system startup.
